---
title: 'Toplogy'
date: 2023-09-09
permalink: /posts/2023/09/topology/
tags:
    - Math
    - Topology
---

# Topology

## The Subspace Topology

### Lemma 16.2. 

Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. If $U$ is open in $Y$ and $Y$ is open in $X$, then $U$ is open in $X$.

### Lemma 16.2. 
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. If $U$ is open in $Y$ and $Y$ is open in $X$, then $U$ is open in $X$.

### Definition
A subset $A$ of a topological space $X$ is said to be closed if the set $X-A$ is open.

## Closed Sets and Limit Points

### Theorem 17.1. 
Let $X$ be a topological space. Then the following conditions hold:\
(1) $\varnothing$ and $X$ are closed.\
(2) Arbitrary intersections of closed sets are closed.\
(3) Finite unions of closed sets are closed.

### Theorem 17.2. 
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. Then a set $A$ is closed in $Y$ if and only if it equals the intersection of a closed set of $X$ with $Y$.

### Theorem 17.3. 
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$. If $A$ is closed in $Y$ and $Y$ is closed in $X$, then $A$ is closed in $X$.

### Definiton
Given a subset $A$ of a topological space $X$, the interior of $A$ is defined as the union of all open sets contained in $A$, and the closure of $A$ is defined as the intersection of all closed sets containing $A$.
$$
\text { Int } A \subset A \subset \bar{A} \text {. }
$$

### Theorem 17.4. 
Let $Y$ be a subspace of $X$; let $A$ be a subset of $Y$; let $\bar{A}$ denote the closure of $A$ in $X$. Then the closure of $A$ in $Y$ equals $\bar{A} \cap Y$.

### Theorem 17.5. 
Let $A$ be a subset of the topological space $X$.\
(a) Then $x \in \bar{A}$ if and only if every open set $U$ containing $x$ intersects $A$.\
(b) Supposing the topology of $X$ is given by a basis, then $x \in \bar{A}$ if and only if every basis element $B$ containing $x$ intersects $A$.

### Definiton
If $A$ is a subset of the topological space $X$ and if $x$ is a point of $X$, we say that $x$ is a limit point (or "cluster point," or "point of accumulation") of $A$ if every neighborhood of $x$ intersects $A$ in some point other than $x$ itself. Said differently, $x$ is a limit point of $A$ if it belongs to the closure of $A-\{x\}$. The point $x$ may lie in $A$ or not; for this definition it does not matter.

### Theorem 17.6. 
Let $A$ be a subset of the topological space $X$; let $A^{\prime}$ be the set of all limit points of $A$. Then
$$
\bar{A}=A \cup A^{\prime} .
$$

### Corollary 17.7. 
A subset of a topological space is closed if and only if it contains all its limit points.

### Definition. 
A topological space $X$ is called a Hausdorff space if for each pair $x_1, x_2$ of distinct points of $X$, there exist neighborhoods $U_1$, and $U_2$ of $x_1$ and $x_2$, respectively, that are disjoint.

### Theorem 17.8. 
Every finite point set in a Hausdorff space $X$ is closed.

### Definition.
The condition that finite point sets be closed has been given a name of its own: it is called the $\boldsymbol{T}_{\mathbf{1}}$ axiom.

### Theorem 17.9. 
Let $X$ be a space satisfying the $T_1$ axiom; let $A$ be a subset of $X$. Then the point $x$ is a limit point of $A$ if and only if every neighborhood of $x$ contains infinitely many points of $A$.

### Theorem 17.10. 
If $X$ is a Hausdorff space, then a sequence of points of $X$ converges to at most one point of $X$.

## Continuous Functions

### Definition
Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces. A function $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is said to be continuous if for each open subset $V$ of $Y$, the set $f^{-1}(V)$ is an open subset of $X$.

### Theorem 18.1. 

Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces; let $f: X \rightarrow Y$. Then the following are equivalent:\
(1) $f$ is continuous.\
(2) For every subset $A$ of $X$, one has $f(\bar{A}) \subset \overline{f(A)}$.\
(3) For every closed set $B$ of $Y$, the set $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$.\
(4) For each $x \in X$ and each neighborhood $V$ of $f(x)$, there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $f(U) \subset V$.
If the condition in (4) holds for the point $x$ of $X$, we say that $f$ is continuous at the point $x$.

### Homeomorphisms

Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces; let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be a bijection. If both the function $f$ and the inverse function
$$
f^{-1}: Y \rightarrow X
$$
are continuous, then $f$ is called a homeomorphism.

Another way to define a homeomorphism is to say that it is a bijective correspondence $f: X \rightarrow Y$ such that $f(U)$ is open if and only if $U$ is open.

Now suppose that $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is an injective continuous map, where $X$ and $Y$ are topological spaces. Let $Z$ be the image set $f(X)$, considered as a subspace of $Y$; then the function $f^{\prime}: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained by restricting the range of $f$ is bijective. If $f^{\prime}$ happens to be a homeomorphism of $X$ with $Z$, we say that the map $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is a topological imbedding, or simply an imbedding, of $X$ in $Y$.

### Theorem 18.2 (Rules for constructing continuous functions). 

Let $X, Y$, and $Z$ be topological spaces.\
(a) (Constant function) If $f: X \rightarrow Y$ maps all of $X$ into the single point $y_0$ of $Y$, then $f$ is continuous.\
(b) (Inclusion) If $A$ is a subspace of $X$, the inclusion function $j: A \rightarrow X$ is continuous.\
(c) (Composites) If $f: X \rightarrow Y$ and $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ are continuous, then the map $g \circ f: X \rightarrow Z$ is continuous.\
(d) (Restricting the domain) If $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous, and if $A$ is a subspace of $X$, then the restricted function $f \mid A: A \rightarrow Y$ is continuous.\
(e) (Restricting or expanding the range) Let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be continuous. If $Z$ is a subspace of $Y$ containing the image set $f(X)$, then the function $g: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained by restricting the range of $f$ is continuous. If $Z$ is a space having $Y$ as a subspace, then the function $h: X \rightarrow Z$ obtained by expanding the range of $f$ is continuous.\
(f) (Local formulation of continuity) The map $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous if $X$ can be written as the union of open sets $U_\alpha$ such that $f \mid U_\alpha$ is continuous for each $\alpha$.

### Theorem 18.3 (The pasting lemma). 
Let $X=A \cup B$, where $A$ and $B$ are closed in $X$. Let $f: A \rightarrow Y$ and $g: B \rightarrow Y$ be continuous. If $f(x)=g(x)$ for every $x \in A \cap B$, then $f$ and $g$ combine to give a continuous function $h: X \rightarrow Y$, defined by setting $h(x)=f(x)$ if $x \in A$, and $h(x)=g(x)$ if $x \in B$.

### Theorem 18.4 (Maps into products). 
Let $f: A \rightarrow X \times Y$ be given by the equation
$$
f(a)=\left(f_1(a), f_2(a)\right) .
$$

Then $f$ is continuous if and only if the functions
$$
f_1: A \longrightarrow X \quad \text { and } \quad f_2: A \longrightarrow Y
$$
are continuous.
The maps $f_1$ and $f_2$ are called the coordinate functions of $f$.

## The Product Topology

### Definition. 
Let $\left\{X_\alpha\right\}_{\alpha \in J}$ be an indexed family of topological spaces. Let us take as a basis for a topology on the product space
$$
\prod_{\alpha \in J} X_\alpha
$$
the collection of all sets of the form
$$
\prod_{\alpha \in J} U_\alpha,
$$
where $U_\alpha$ is open in $X_\alpha$, for each $\alpha \in J$. The topology generated by this basis is called the box topology.

Now we generalize the subbasis formulation of the definition. Let
$$
\pi_\beta: \prod_{\alpha \in J} X_\alpha \rightarrow X_\beta
$$
be the function assigning to each element of the product space its $\beta$ th coordinate,
$$
\pi_\beta\left(\left(x_\alpha\right)_{\alpha \in J}\right)=x_\beta ;
$$
it is called the projection mapping associated with the index $\beta$.

### Definition.
Let $S_\beta$ denote the collection
$$
S_\beta=\left\{\pi_\beta^{-1}\left(U_\beta\right) \mid U_\beta \text { open in } X_\beta\right\}
$$
and let $S$ denote the union of these collections,
$$
\mathcal{S}=\bigcup_{\beta \in J} \mathfrak{S}_\beta .
$$

The topology generated by the subbasis $S$ is called the product topology. In this topology $\prod_{\alpha \in J} X_\alpha$ is called a product space.

### Theorem 19.1 (Comparison of the box and product topologies). 
The box topology on $\prod X_\alpha$ has as basis all sets of the form $\prod U_\alpha$, where $U_\alpha$ is open in $X_\alpha$ for each $\alpha$. The product topology on $\prod X_\alpha$ has as basis all sets of the form $\prod U_\alpha$, where $U_\alpha$ is open in $X_\alpha$ for each $\alpha$ and $U_\alpha$ equals $X_\alpha$ except for finitely many values of $\alpha$.

### Theorem 19.2.
Suppose the topology on each space $X_\alpha$ is given by a basis $\mathcal{B}_\alpha$. The collection of all sets of the form
$$
\prod_{\alpha \in J} B_\alpha
$$
where $B_\alpha \in \mathscr{B}_\alpha$ for each $\alpha$, will serve as a basis for the box topology on $\prod_{\alpha \in J} X_\alpha$.
The collection of all sets of the same form, where $B_\alpha \in \mathcal{B}_\alpha$ for finitely many indices $\alpha$ and $B_\alpha=X_\alpha$ for all the remaining indices, will serve as a basis for the product topology $\prod_{\alpha \in J} X_\alpha$.

### Theorem 19.3.
Let $A_\alpha$ be a subspace of $X_\alpha$, for each $\alpha \in J$. Then $\prod A_\alpha$ is a subspace of $\prod X_\alpha$ if both products are given the box topology, or if both products are given the product topology.

### Theorem 19.4.
If each space $X_\alpha$ is Hausdorff space, then $\prod X_\alpha$ is a Hausdorff space in both the box and product topologies.

### Theorem 19.6.
 Let $f: A \rightarrow \prod_{\alpha \in J} X_\alpha$ be given by the equation
$$
f(a)=\left(f_\alpha(a)\right)_{\alpha \in J},
$$
where $f_\alpha: A \rightarrow X_\alpha$ for each $\alpha$. Let $\prod X_\alpha$ have the product topology. Then the function $f$ is continuous if and only if each function $f_\alpha$ is continuous.

Note this only holds for the product topology. The box topology doesn't holds for the example $f(t) = (t, t, t, \cdots)$. We can consider $B = (-1,1) \times (-\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2}) \cdots$ The preimage will be 0, which is  not open in $\mathbb{R}$.

## The Metric Topology

### Definition. 
A metric on a set $X$ is a function
$$
d: X \times X \longrightarrow R
$$
having the following properties:\
(1) $d(x, y) \geq 0$ for all $x, y \in X$; equality holds if and only if $x=y$.\
(2) $d(x, y)=d(y, x)$ for all $x, y \in X$.\
(3) (Triangle inequality) $d(x, y)+d(y, z) \geq d(x, z)$, for all $x, y, z \in X$.

### Definition.
If $d$ is a metric on the set $X$, then the collection of all $\epsilon$-balls $B_d(x, \epsilon)$, for $x \in X$ and $\epsilon>0$, is a basis for a topology on $X$, called the metric topology induced by $d$.

### Theorem 20.1. 
Let $X$ be a metric space with metric $d$. Define $\bar{d}: X \times X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ by the equation
$$
\bar{d}(x, y)=\min \{d(x, y), 1\} .
$$

Then $\bar{d}$ is a metric that induces the same topology as $d$.
The metric $\bar{d}$ is called the standard bounded metric corresponding to $d$.

### Definition.
Given $\mathbf{x}=\left(x_1, \ldots, x_n\right)$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$, we define the norm of $\mathbf{x}$ by the equation
$$
\|x\|=\left(x_1^2+\cdots+x_n^2\right)^{1 / 2}
$$
and we define the euclidean metric $d$ on $\mathbb{R}^n$ by the equation
$$
d(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y})=\|\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{y}\|=\left[\left(x_1-y_1\right)^2+\cdots+\left(x_n-y_n\right)^2\right]^{1 / 2} .
$$

We define the square metric $\rho$ by the equation
$$
\rho(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y})=\max \left\{\left|x_1-y_1\right|, \ldots,\left|x_n-y_n\right|\right\}
$$

### Lemma 20.2.

Let $d$ and $d^{\prime}$ be two metrics on the set $X$; let $\mathcal{T}$ and $\mathcal{T}^{\prime}$ be the topologies they induce, respectively. Then $\mathcal{T}^{\prime}$ is finer than $\mathcal{T}$ if and only if for each $x$ in $X$ and each $\epsilon>0$, there exists a $\delta>0$ such that
$$
B_{d^{\prime}}(x, \delta) \subset B_d(x, \epsilon)
$$

### Theorem 20.3.
The topologies on $\mathbb{R}^n$ induced by the euclidean metric $d$ and the square metric $\rho$ are the same as the product topology on $\mathbb{R}^n$.

### Definition.
 

Given an index set $J$, and given points $\mathbf{x}=\left(x_\alpha\right)_{\alpha \in J}$ and $\mathbf{y}=\left(y_\alpha\right)_{\alpha \in J}$ of $\mathbb{R}^J$, let us define a metric $\bar{\rho}$ on $\mathbb{R}^J$ by the equation
$$
\bar{\rho}(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y})=\sup \left\{\bar{d}\left(x_\alpha, y_\alpha\right) \mid \alpha \in J\right\}
$$
where $\bar{d}$ is the standard bounded metric on $\mathbb{R}$. It is easy to check that $\bar{\rho}$ is indeed a metric; it is called the uniform metric on $\mathbb{R}^J$, and the topology it induces is called the uniform topology.

The relation between this topology and the product and box topologies is the following:

### Theorem 20.4.

The uniform topology on $\mathbb{R}^J$ is finer than the product topology and coarser than the box topology; these three topologies are all different if $J$ is infinite.

### Theorem 20.5.

Let $\bar{d}(a, b)=\min \{|a-b|, 1\}$ be the standard bounded metric on $\mathbb{R}$. If $\mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{y}$ are two points of $\mathbb{R}^\omega$, define
$$
D(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{y})=\sup \left\{\frac{\bar{d}\left(x_i, y_i\right)}{i}\right\} .
$$

Then $D$ is a metric that induces the product topology on $\mathbb{R}^\omega$.

## The Metric Topology (Continued)

### Theorem 21.1.

Let $f: X \rightarrow Y$; let $X$ and $Y$ be metrizable with metrics $d_X$ and $d_Y$, respectively. Then continuity of $f$ is equivalent to the requirement that given $x \in X$ and given $\epsilon>0$, there exists $\delta>0$ such that
$$
d_X(x, y) \Longrightarrow d_Y(f(x), f(y))<\epsilon .
$$

### Lemma 21.2

(The sequence lemma). Let $X$ be a topological space; let $A \subset X$. If there is a sequence of points of $A$ converging to $x$, then $x \in \bar{A}$; the converse holds if $X$ is metrizable.

### Theorem 21.5.
If $X$ is a topological space, and if $f, g: X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ are continuous functions, then $f+g, f-g$, and $f \cdot g$ are continuous. If $g(x) \neq 0$ for all $x$, then $f / g$ is continuous.

### Definition.
Let $f_n: X \rightarrow Y$ be a sequence of functions from the set $X$ to the metric space $Y$. Let $d$ be the metric for $Y$. We say that the sequence $\left(f_n\right)$ converges uniformly to the function $f: X \rightarrow Y$ if given $\epsilon>0$, there exists an integer $N$ such that
$$
d\left(f_n(x), f(x)\right)<\epsilon
$$
for all $n>N$ and all $x$ in $X$.

### Theorem 21.6 (Uniform limit theorem).

Let $f_n: X \rightarrow Y$ be a sequence of continuous functions from the topological space $X$ to the metric space $Y$. If $\left(f_n\right)$ converges uniformly to $f$, then $f$ is continuous.

## Connected Spaces

### Definition.
Let $X$ be a topological space. A separation of $X$ is a pair $U, V$ of disjoint nonempty open subsets of $X$ whose union is $X$. The space $X$ is said to be connected if there does not exist a separation of $X$.

A space $X$ is connected if and only if the only subsets of $X$ that are both open and closed in $X$ are the empty set and $X$ itself.

### Lemma 23.1.
If $Y$ is a subspace of $X$, a separation of $Y$ is a pair of disjoint nonempty sets $A$ and $B$ whose union is $Y$, neither of which contains a limit point of the other. The space $Y$ is connected if there exists no separation of $Y$.

### Lemma 23.2. 
If the sets $C$ and $D$ form a separation of $X$, and if $Y$ is a connected subspace of $X$, then $Y$ lies entirely within either $C$ or $D$.

### Theorem 23.3. 
The union of a collection of connected subspaces of $X$ that have a point in common is connected.

### Theorem 23.4. 
Let $A$ be a connected subspace of $X$. If $A \subset B \subset \bar{A}$, then $B$ is also connected.